We’ve come
to our principal talk
for this 141st class of Gilead,
the graduation.
And we’re going to invite
Brother Gerrit Lösch now.
I thought you’d find this interesting.
This is the 141st class.
We’ve heard that throughout
the morning.
Well, 100 classes ago,
Brother Lösch was graduating
from the 41st class.
And I don’t know if heaven did it,
but we had an Austrian in each one of those.
So that’s very nice.
And I don’t want to say anything,
but he is getting a little older,
but he still looks great, doesn’t he?
Because he knew the sister in this class
when she was just a tiny little girl.
So very nice.
And Brother Lösch gave me that information;
so it’s bona fide.
So Brother Lösch is going to speak
on the theme
“Make Good Use of Your Time.”
What’s the time?
Well, anyway, it’s time to start.
There are certain things
of which the richest
and the poorest person on earth
have the same:
number one, life;
second, two parents;
third, free will;
and fourth, time.
Poor and rich
all have 24 hours a day.
Therefore,
it’s not quite correct to say
one has “no time” or “plenty of time.”
All have the same—24 hours.
The word “time” is
an integral part of our vocabulary.
What is time?
Some say, “Time is money.”
If we make decisions,
“time will tell” whether they are good ones.
In the world,
some make wrong decisions and then,
therefore, they have to “do time” in prison.
When driving a car,
we may “make good time,”
although from “time to time,”
we may stop and have a snack.
We are “taking our time”
if we do not hurry.
We may still arrive “on time”
or even “ahead of time”
if we “time it right.”
But “at times,” we may still be late,
especially if our “timing” was poor,
which may not be “all the time,”
just “from time to time.”
After we arrive at our destination,
the “time has arrived”
to have a “good time.”
But on a more serious note,
how does the Bible use the term “time”?
Ecclesiastes 3:1 says:
‘There is an appointed time for everything,
‘a time for every activity under the heavens:
‘for birth and for death;
‘to plant, to uproot;
‘to tear down, to build up;
‘to weep and to laugh;
‘to wail and to dance;
a time to keep and a time to throw away,’
like when we have to move
to another complex.
It is now
the “acceptable time” to preach
because “the appointed times
of the nations”
are over and we are living
in “the time of the end.”
Therefore, we should be zealous
in line with the urgency of times.
Jehovah blesses the work
and said that he
“will speed it up in its own time.”
The Greek adjective ai·oʹni·os can,
as is evident from the context,
signify both “long lasting”
and “everlasting.”
From the first man, Adam,
forward, time has been measured
in terms of years.
Thus, Adam was 130 years old
when he became father to Seth.
Monthly divisions
also came into use.
By the time of the Flood,
we find time divided
into months of 30 days,
and a period of five months
is shown in the Bible to equal 150 days.
The same record
also indicates that Noah
divided the year into 12 months.
To track time,
a calendar is used for dividing time
into years, months, weeks, and days.
The world’s oldest calendar
was discovered in a Scottish field
at Warren Field,
according to BBC News
from the year 2013
and National Geographic
of July 15, 2013.
It was excavated first
in the year 2004 only.
To track time during the day,
also, sundials were invented.
They are considered the first
time-measuring devices known to man.
Dating to the 19th dynasty,
or the 13th century before our Common Era,
a few years ago, a sundial was found
on the floor of a workman’s hut
in the Valley of Kings,
the burial place of rulers from Egypt.
In 1675,
King Charles II of England
commissioned that a small observatory
be constructed in what is now
the London borough
of Greenwich
in order to find out
the longitude of places
for perfecting navigation
and astronomy.
Two newly invented timepieces
with pendulums 13 feet,
or 4 meters, long
were installed
to make accurate calculations
of the earth’s rotation.
Noon Greenwich Mean Time
is the moment
when the sun reaches
its zenith over any point
on the Greenwich longitude line,
or meridian,
from Latin meridianus, of midday.
Based on this Latin word,
time before noon
came to be known as ante meridiem,
or before midday;
and time after noon
came to be known as post meridiem,
or p.m., as we call it.
Today, time is measured
for accuracy with atomic clocks.
They are regulated
by atomic vibrations
and are accurate to one second
in 80 million years
—very accurate.
Again, what is time?
You have heard the saying
“as time goes by”
or “time flies,”
but this is Scripturally
not quite correct.
Time does not go
or walk or fly
—we fly.
And this is supported
at Psalm 90:10,
where Moses wrote this psalm,
not David.
And it says in verse 10:
“The span of our life is 70 years,
“or 80 if one is especially strong.
“But they are filled
with trouble and sorrow;
“they quickly pass by,
and away we fly”
—not the time.
When a man dies,
time is still there
and hasn’t flown anywhere.
Again, what is time?
Twelve o’clock noon in New York
is twelve o’clock midnight
in Mongolia.
When you cross
the date line westbound,
suddenly you have lost
a day, seemingly.
But did you really lose a day?
No.
It’s just the perception.
To the contrary,
when you come
from Japan to the United States,
you seem to gain a day
crossing the date line eastbound.
But does this change the reality of time?
No.
You have not become a day younger.
Sorry.
What’s the time on North Pole,
exactly on North Pole?
If you stay on the North Pole,
does time move on?
Something to think about.
Really, time is an abstract concept
that humans have invented
to explain, compare,
and measure what we observe.
Sometimes, time seems to move
faster than at other times.
There’s an old saying
that “a watched kettle never boils.”
It’s true that when
we are watching time,
when we are conscious of it,
when we are waiting
for something to happen,
then it seems to pass ever so slowly.
However, if we are busy,
if we are interested in and preoccupied
with what we are doing,
then it really appears that time flies.
Moreover, with older people,
time seems to pass
much more quickly
than with young children.
And why is this?
One year added to the life
of a one-year-old
means a 100-percent increase.
One year added to the life
of a 50-year-old
means just 2 percent more.
The perception of time
is also subject to circumstances.
When a couple in love meets,
they wish time would stand still,
is it not so?
But they cannot slow down
what is perceived as time.
On the other hand,
when somebody is sick in a hospital bed,
he might wish that time would pass
more quickly
so he could recover
sooner and go home sooner.
But he cannot speed up
the passing of time.
Time is an observed phenomenon
by means of which
we humans sense and record
changes in our environment
and in the universe.
In the universe,
time is measured
based on the speed of light,
which is a constant.
The Michelson-Morley experiment,
around the end of the 19th century,
discovered that the speed of light
is the same
regardless of the direction
it’s heading
and regardless of the motion
of the originating source.
Light moves at about
300,000 kilometers per second.
It takes about 100,000 years
for a beam of light
to travel from just one end
of our Milky Way to the other end.
And our Milky Way
is said to have
200 billion stars like the sun.
What you see
when you look up at night
to the night sky,
it’s not what is there now,
but what was there in the past.
When a light beam from a star
that is a million light years away
hits the earth,
it means that the object
that you now see
was there a million years ago.
To see what is there now
and whether the star even still exists,
you need to wait another million years
until the light beam
from that place arrives at the earth.
Just imagine!
Looking at the universe,
we always look only into the past.
It is estimated that the visible universe
exists for 13 billion years.
Most scientists agree that it
had a beginning,
so-called big bang.
The Bible says:
“In the beginning God created,”
and that includes the visible universe.
The universe expands in all directions.
Scientists have not found an end
of the visible universe
with optical telescopes
or radio telescopes.
But if one would continue
to travel through space long enough,
logically one should come
to an area where there are no more
stars or galaxies, just empty space.
Some known galaxies
are moving into that empty space,
or toward that empty space,
with about the speed of light.
It’s very impressive.
Some scientists say,
“Time does not exist.”
It exists, however,
definitely in our perception.
Man invented
the concept of time
to be able to
measure changes.
Did time always exist?
Well, in Jude 25,
we can read what
it says there
from our own Bible.
It says:
“To the only God our Savior
through Jesus Christ our Lord,
“be glory, majesty,
might, and authority
“for all past eternity
“and now and into all eternity.
Amen.”
Well, we know Jehovah
had no beginning.
We have a hard time
grasping that.
When Jehovah was alone
before he created the Logos,
there was no change,
because Jehovah does not change.
This helps us to understand
in what way Jehovah always existed.
Jehovah is not subject to time.
He exists independently
and outside
from what we
perceive as time.
Where the New World Translation
translates “past eternity,”
in Jude 25,
the Greek original text
says “before all time.”
Surprise, surprise—before time.
The conclusion is
that time had a beginning.
Is this a new understanding?
No.
If you want to put down
a reference,
Watchtower, 1982, September 1—
September 1, page 22,
and paragraph 17.
It says about this verse
in Jude 25:
“Jude appropriately
ascribed glory, majesty,
“might and authority
to Jehovah
‘for all past eternity,’”
or to quote The Watchtower,
“‘before all time,’
as men might know it.”
We seem safe to say
that time as we know it,
as humans,
came into being when Jehovah
started to create first the Logos.
But what we perceive
as time now
will continue forever
and ever in the future.
At 1 Corinthians 7:29,
it says:
“Moreover, this I say, brothers,
the time left is reduced.”
Christ had given his disciples
the sign of his presence
and had warned them:
“Keep on the watch, therefore,
because you do not know
on what day
your Lord is coming.”
—Matthew 24:3, 42.
The time left was “reduced”
in the sense that those
first-century Christians
had to live constantly
in expectation of Christ’s coming.
Furthermore, they did not know
how much time remained
for them individually
before “time and unforeseen occurrence”
brought their life to a close.
As an important event nears,
there’s an increased sense of urgency.
How can we illustrate that?
Well, suppose there’s a wedding.
The days before are very busy
in order to prepare well for the event.
Even on the wedding day,
the bride will be urgently preparing herself
so the wedding party
does not have to wait,
which would be very impolite.
If you have to catch a flight,
you are perhaps urgently and nervously
preparing your luggage,
making sure that you
are at the airport on time
because you do not want
to miss the flight.
Suppose a farmer has
a mature crop ready to be harvested.
Suddenly, there is a storm warning.
Dark clouds
loom at the horizon.
The storm could destroy the crop.
Don’t you think
that he’ll urgently organize
his whole household
to go out to the field
and begin to bring in the crop
before the storm hits?
Christians are involved
in a harvesting work.
John 4:35 quotes Jesus, saying:
‘View the fields,
that they are ripe for harvesting.’
The harvest time
will soon be over.
So are we making good use
of our time
to help bring in the harvest?
“The harvest is great,
but the workers are few,”
said Jesus.—Matthew 9:37.
And that shows the urgency.
The hurricane
of the great tribulation is close!
It’s a hurricane in the illustration,
so we need to hurry.
When a woman
is close to giving birth
and the birth pangs started
—the water broke, let’s say—
then it is urgent
to rush her to the hospital
or call a midwife
to come to the home.
Jesus’ death was
a much more important event
than a wedding, a birth,
a flight, or a crop.
As the appointed time
for Jesus’ sacrificial death
drew near,
his sense of urgency increased.
Jesus stepped up his activity
and his preaching
as the time for him
to be on earth ran out.
True Christians have always lived
with a sense of urgency.
In the first century,
Christians in Judea and Jerusalem
needed to “keep on the watch,”
and that was imperative
because Jesus warned
that the Roman armies
would come and would attack the city.
And he said:
“Let those in Judea
begin fleeing to the mountains.”
It was urgent!
Now more than ever,
the time that remains
before Jehovah
destroys false religion
through political elements is reduced.
It is vital, then,
that we make
wise use of our time
—the time that remains.
How?
As the apostle Paul explains
in Ephesians 5:16,
we must ‘buy out the opportune time’
for “the more important things”
at the expense of what is nonessential.
We need to make every day count.
Do we live as though the end
could come at any time,
or do we live
as though it is far off?
Jesus warned:
“The Son of man
is coming at an hour that you
do not think to be it.”
—Matthew 24:44.
Our pattern of life reflects
how much we trust in Jehovah
by putting faith
in his prophetic Word,
keeping the urgency
of the times in mind.
Avoid a complacent attitude,
like the people
of Sodom and Gomorrah had.
‘They were eating, drinking, buying,
selling, planting, building,’ said Jesus.
‘But on the day that Lot came out of Sodom,
‘it rained fire and sulfur from heaven
and destroyed them all.’
—Luke 17:28, 29.
It was urgent for Lot
and his family to flee,
and it’s urgent for us too.
We need to be prepared.
We can prepare, for instance,
if we live in an earthquake zone
by having our houses
built earthquake-proof.
It costs more
—more effort, more time
involved preparing the house—
but when an earthquake hits,
then we are
better prepared to survive.
Revelation refers
to “the four angels who”
have prepared the hour,
or “have been prepared for the hour
and day and month and year,”
units of time that we can understand.
—Revelation 9:14, 15.
Seeing how prophecies
were fulfilled at specific times
should inspire faith
in the God of “times and seasons”
and in his Word.
Soon the angels will let loose
the four winds of destruction.
Are we ready?
Jehovah is a perfect Timekeeper.
Do we make good use
of what we perceive as time
by attending meetings,
reading the Bible daily
—even after Gilead graduation—
going out in field ministry?
Whereas, it is appropriate to take time
for leisure and other activities,
it is good
not to waste time
but keep the balance.
If we use time wisely
—buying it out
by giving priority to spiritual things
and sacrifice less important time
as a payment, so to say—
then we will see
the promise fulfilled
to live forever
and ever and ever.
No more need, then,
to worry about time.
But now is the time to conclude my talk,
so I would not go overtime.
Thank you very much, Brother Lösch.
We thoroughly enjoyed that,
and we appreciate your hard work
and meditation.
Now, we’ll share some greetings
from various branches
and highlight some of the things
that they wanted to pass on.
Angola: “With their faith strengthened
by means of a thorough study of God’s Word
“and refined spiritual qualities,
the graduates will give a fine contribution
to further stabilize
and strengthen Jehovah’s organization.”
Then Argentina:
“Although the school of Gilead
“will soon become a memory
[they didn’t know
about Brother Herd’s talk]
you will treasure it
for the rest of your lives.”
Armenia: “We rejoice with you graduates
on this special day.
“We’re delighted
to see how Jehovah is training
more brothers and sisters
to take on additional responsibility.”
Benin: You’ll find
this one quite interesting.
This part I’ll pass on.
“To all of you
[and this is to the students, or graduates]
“Please, hurry up!
We are waiting for you
out here in the worldwide field.”
Bolivia: “Our hearts rejoice along with you,
dear Gilead graduates,
on this day that brings so much praise
to our heavenly Father.”
And then Britain:
“What a wonderful blessing
“and unique privilege
it is for each student to have
his or her faith strengthened through
an intensive study of God’s Word.”
Burundi: “The five months of Bible training
that you have received
“will give added impetus
to the all-important work
of helping all who are
‘rightly disposed for everlasting life.’”
And then Congo (Kinshasa):
“We ‘rejoice with those who rejoice.’
This is, indeed,
a special day for all the graduates.”
Georgia, the country: “Congratulations
on successfully completing
the spiritually enriching course of study.”
Germany:
“Please accept warm love and greetings
“from Selters Bethel in Germany!
“Jehovah, as our Grand Instructor,
continues to educate his servants
in a wonderful way.”
Haiti: “This graduation
is another proof that Jehovah
does treat his loyal servants
in a ‘special way.’”
And then France:
“We wish to send you
“the very warm love
from the France Bethel family
as you are about to receive your diplomas
along with your service assignments.”
And Japan sends their
“warm Christian love and greetings.
All graduates must have
experienced firsthand Jehovah’s loving care.”
Kenya: “As you now
take the benefit
“of this training with you
to your assignments,
we are confident that ‘Jehovah
will be with you wherever you go.’”
The Netherlands: “Please accept
our warm love and greetings,
“and may Jehovah continue to bless you
in your assignment,
whether a new one
or one you are familiar with.”
Nigeria sends their
“warmest greetings to all.”
Paraguay passes on
their wish to have
‘Jehovah bless all your
efforts in training.’
Solomon Islands,
known as the Happy Isles,
wishes to send their
“warmest Christian love and greetings.”
Suriname: This is quite interesting.
They share this point:
“In 1959, two brothers
from Suriname
“attended the 32nd class of Gilead.
“Since then, many in Suriname
nurtured the dream of going to Gilead.
“Now, 57 years later,
we rejoice with the privilege of having
one more student attending a class.”
And then Thailand:
“From the Land of Smiles,
we add our happy smiles
to yours and send our warm love
and greetings to all on this special day.”
And finally, Ukraine:
“During the past five months,
the Great Potter, Jehovah God,
“was intensely molding you
so that you can now say:
“‘We are all the clay,
and you are our Potter;
we are all the work of your hand.’”
So we appreciate
those sincere greetings
from our brothers throughout the earth.
Now, before we share
the diplomas with you,
we want to just pass on these statistics.
The brothers like to receive these.
For this particular 141st class:
number of single brothers, 12;
number of single sisters, 4;
number of married couples, 16;
total number of students, 48;
their average age, 40.8;
average years in the truth, 25.1;
average years in full-time ministry, 19.0.
So for those that love statistics,
you now have them.
Now, we’re going to have
the presentation
of the diplomas
to the 141st class of Gilead.
Brother David Schafer
is going to help me.
He’s a helper to the Teaching Committee,
and he’ll be helping as we
pass on the diplomas
to these graduates
of the 141st class of Gilead.
So let’s take a look at them.
So, first, we have
Brother and Sister Barnizo,
who will be returning to the Philippines.
Brother Bingen
will be returning to Suriname.
Brother Bockstaele
will be serving in the Solomon Islands.
Brother Burchall
will be returning to Liberia.
Brother Cano
will be returning to Argentina.
Brother and Sister Cook
will be returning to Britain.
Brother and Sister Ernits
will be returning to Estonia.
Brother and Sister Fais
will be returning to Italy.
Sister Gaši
will be returning to Serbia.
Brother and Sister Gewitz
will be returning to Denmark.
Brother and Sister Gustave
will be returning to France.
Brother and Sister Janian
will be serving in Georgia.
Brother and Sister Karapetyan
will be returning to Armenia.
Brother and Sister Kreuger
will be returning to the Netherlands.
Brother Lobo
will be returning to Chile.
Brother Mamulashvili
will be returning to Georgia.
Brother and Sister Martinez
will be returning to Paraguay.
Brother and Sister Mbanzulu
will be returning to Congo (Kinshasa).
Brother and Sister Onyango
will be returning to Kenya.
Sister Paillard
will be returning to Asia.
Brother Pritchard
will be serving in Benin.
Brother and Sister Rosenzvig
will be returning to Israel.
Brother and Sister Ryan
will be returning to Ghana.
Sister Schumi
will be returning to Asia.
Brother Steiner
will be returning to Germany.
Brother Titus
will be returning to Papua New Guinea.
Brother and Sister Ungebaev
will be returning to Finland.
Brother Vetlovas
will be returning to Lithuania.
Brother Wafula
will be returning to Kenya.
Sister Xayalad
will be returning to Asia.
Brother Yagotintsev
will be returning to Russia.
And Brother and Sister Yiga
will be returning to Uganda.
So at this point,
as we customarily do,
we’re going to have
the class resolution letter read,
and Brother Richard Cook
will do that for the class.
“To the Governing Body
and the Bethel family.
“Dear Brothers:
“From the moment
we received our invitations to Gilead
“down to this day of graduation,
“we feel we have received a gift
of undeserved kindness
“from Jehovah and his organization.
“There is nothing that we have done
or could ever do
“to deserve the instruction,
training, molding,
“and loving attention that we have
received over the past five months.
“Just as Isaiah 26:12 says:
“‘O Jehovah, . . .
“everything we have done
you have accomplished for us.’
“Jehovah has given us the privilege
“of experiencing close association
“with you dear brothers
of the Governing Body.
“Your humility,
your love for the brotherhood,
“and your absolute determination
“to follow Jehovah’s direction
have deeply impressed us.
“We saw this clearly
during your faith-strengthening lectures
“but also in the lighter moments
“that you shared with us
outside of the classroom,
“all the while preparing
for your move to Warwick.
“Seeing your examples firsthand
has only made us more convinced
“that this is the organization
“Jehovah is blessing
and directing today.
“What a true joy
it has been for us
“to be part of this
delightful Bethel family!
“You’ve been an example
in hospitality,
“making us feel at home
away from home.
“The excellent work of so many departments
has created an environment
“where studying day and night
and night and day
“was both possible and enjoyable.
“An essential part of our learning experience
“has been seeing the faith
“of so many of you
long-time members of the family.
“We have also learned
from the faith of you,
“the many commuters
and temporary volunteers,
“who willingly make yourselves available
“to serve here at Bethel.
“We are truly grateful to you,
our dear instructors,
“for generously giving of your very selves,
“both mind and heart,
“in the way that you have taught us.
“During our training,
your love for the Bible truth
“that you were teaching
touched us deeply.
“Your accuracy
and yet your warmth,
“your seriousness
and yet your humor
“showed us a balance
worthy of imitation.
“Your obvious determination
to hold fast to the direction
“of ‘the faithful and discreet slave’
“has made
a lasting impression on us.
“As we go to our assignments,
we are resolved to do
“as 1 Peter 4:10 states:
“‘To the extent that each one
has received a gift,
“‘use it in ministering to one another
“as fine stewards
of God’s undeserved kindness.’
“Gilead has been a priceless gift
“from Jehovah through all of you.
“Having been shown
such undeserved kindness,
“we desire to use it to demonstrate
our love for Jehovah.
“More than ever before,
we are determined to continue
“to advance the preaching of the good news
and to strengthen our brothers.
“It is our earnest prayer
that this be our life’s work,
“all to the honor and glory
of our heavenly Father, Jehovah.
Your brothers and sisters
of the 141st class of Gilead.”
Before we have a brief moment
for some concluding comments,
I have some more statistics.
But this is of interest to us
with the attendance figures:
Canada, 679;
the United States, that’s 9,814.
But this is who that includes:
Patterson, 3,519;
Brooklyn, 1,405;
Fishkill, 763;
Wallkill, 2,540;
Warwick, 1,219;
Curaçao, 61;
Fort Lauderdale, Florida, 134;
Jamaica, 37;
and Puerto Rico, 136.
So that makes
a grand total of 10,493.
I don’t know what the delay was for,
but they all know hundreds of thousands
are going to see it pretty soon.
And that’s really what I wanted
to just pass on to you.
Just a brief review of some
of the key thoughts,
and we certainly can’t touch
on all of it.
But “See—The Cloud!”
Follow the cloud, not men—
nice reminder.
And of course,
you’ll always remember Brother Herd’s talk,
and nice thought, “Smells ring bells.”
Again, the translators
will have fun with that.
And then the warning about ego;
it’s a good caution, counsel.
And nice thoughts
about testing Jehovah and being tested.
And, of course, all the good experiences
and interviews
and Brother Lösch reminding us
to make good use of our time.
So it’s been a wonderful program.
What’s nice, too,
because you get into your assignment
and because Jehovah has blessed us
with the broadcasting of the program
—so that will be up there in due course—
and now this has been permeating
with excitement
with your family and close friends.
And see now,
with Jehovah’s blessing
on this project,
you can go
and play it months from now.
You might face some
discouraging circumstance.
Well, go back,
and you can stop it
—think about it.
I mean, what a blessing,
especially for you graduates
to be able to go back
and then just absorb more.
So keep that in mind,
and Jehovah will bless you
with good, good reminders
in the days ahead.
So at this point,
we’re going to invite all—
Now, we were supposed
to all be ready to sing this new song,
and I know
my wife and I practiced.
We hope you practiced.
Those that know
how to read music,
please sing out
and help those around you.
It’s a beautiful song,
and I love the lyrics now.
See, because we’ve had—
One of my favorites is song 135
in the songbook we have at this point.
But see,
this has a message here,
and you sing and you keep
this in mind in your assignment:
“We Will,” not might,
“We Will Keep Enduring.”
So take these lyrics to heart
as you go to your assignments.
So let’s stand
and sing song number 154.
And then Brother Leon Weaver,
a helper to the Service Committee
of the Governing Body,
will conclude with prayer.